Chloe Thurston: decide who to vote for, I'm casting a vote. It's kind of like predicting the future. Right. You know, the idea that electing one candidate will produce a better outcomes and electing other candidate.
Chloe Thurston: So how do people make that decision, right, what factors do they use. How do they decide what those standards are and how do they decide which candidates meet their standards.
Chloe Thurston: And again, you know, I think the important thing to think about is that choices are made under conditions of uncertainty. There's not a lot of time.
Chloe Thurston: Or incentive to spend time reducing that uncertainty. Maybe the incentives different you know for different types of elections different levels, etc. If we think about our, sort of, you know, mayoral elections or city council elections.
Chloe Thurston: There's probably less incentive, even though it probably also affects people the most
Chloe Thurston: But the again, people don't spend a lot of time thinking about these things because they've sort of chance casting the decisive vote was pretty low.
Chloe Thurston: So instead, and as we've talked about earlier in the class to people often economize political scientists find that people use simple cues to call them heuristics.
Chloe Thurston: shortcuts to make their decisions and they also rely on information from the news media campaign advertising, opinion leaders that is sort of prominent people who sort of share their views so they can
Chloe Thurston: Project, you know, whatever that person says, you know, well, okay, that's probably also where I would stand on a candidate or an issue.
Chloe Thurston: And also their own experience. So I want to talk about sort of a few of these different things that people sometimes way when they're deciding who to vote for. And so one is we always think about sort of
Chloe Thurston: Past Performance as being one way to think about future. Right. So one way to predict the future is to look at the past and treat the election as a referendum on incumbent or major parties performance in office.
Chloe Thurston: And then you know if that's how you think about voting. Then you ask has the current official or party done an adequate job of serving the voters values and interests if you know you can say yes, then you vote in the affirmative you vote for that. If not, then you vote.
Chloe Thurston: You know you vote them out. And that's sort of the basic idea of retrospective voting.
Chloe Thurston: And people sort of think about different, you know, how do you measure performance. That's the question that then comes up, well, sometimes people think about national the national economy or foreign policy.
Chloe Thurston: I think if you look at sort of what people are concerned about right now. It might be the coronavirus response. But the idea being, you know, considering how an incumbent party has operated
Chloe Thurston: You can use that as sort of information or a cue to how they might operate in the future, a second I'm going to do all these videos at the same time. So we can sort of think about them.
Chloe Thurston: A SECOND. SORT OF to think about personal care is perspective voting and this is especially you know if the candidate or party is not an uncommon party. Well, you might not necessarily have the record to go off of right, you can't really
Chloe Thurston: Use the past to think about what they're going to do in the future because they weren't actually in our past. So in that case, you think about, well, you know, what do I think this
Chloe Thurston: This party or official will will do. Right. Um, another sort of thing that people consider our candidate characteristics voters make predictions based on candidates personal characteristics.
Chloe Thurston: May be based on qualities like their competence or experience or honesty or leadership skills or knowledge but also other criteria to like like their sex or their race or their age or their place of residence or their religion.
Chloe Thurston: And why I'm also, you know, we think as political scientists that you know it's because voters can't really anticipate all the problems or issues that are going to come up after the election.
Chloe Thurston: But sometimes they sort of project, you know, well, this person is kind of like me, you know, so I can kind of trust that they're going to do what I want them to do.
Chloe Thurston: And I found this I've studied sort of voting on like abortion when it was a state level issue that sort of there was that that Catholics in California. The Catholic legislators were much more likely to vote.
Chloe Thurston: Against sort of expanding access to abortion or legalizing abortion and so voters were like very rationally when the non like ANTI ABORTION voters were very rationally.
Chloe Thurston: Electing Catholic officials to the state government, on that basis, because they were you know they were sort of looking at their
Chloe Thurston: personal characteristics and sort of thinking about what that means in terms of their, their voting.
Chloe Thurston: So also party identification and we think party identification is probably more powerful. Now it's the best single predictor of the vote in federal elections and it's proven a strong predictor of the vote in any election where of candidates run under party labels.
Chloe Thurston: I think in 2012 about 90% of strong partisans voted for their party for president. And this was pretty similar, in the last election to 2016 as well.
Chloe Thurston: So I'm going to show a few different examples of these different ways of thinking about who to vote for. And you can think about sort of what what type of voting, you know, model, each of us might
Chloe Thurston: correspond with. So we're going to try. If you can't hear anything or if everything freezes. Do what you normally do and put it in the chat. So I know because otherwise it's it's difficult for me to know. Okay, so here we go.
Okay.
The Supreme Court for
If you're gonna hope we all need some photo ID, but I lived here all my life, stopping all Americans from vote and is for the protection of all Americans. But I'm a 40 year old white guy who didn't go to college and gets all these news for monitors at gas stations in your go
Chloe Thurston: Barack Obama. I don't know. I already got one wife, telling me to eat healthy, but she promised me death panels and grandpa still alive. Mitt Romney.
Chloe Thurston: I hear he wears magic underpants. I expect the leader of the free world to go commando bless his horse totally choked at the Olympics. On the other hand, he did invent Obamacare. Okay. Um, so any thoughts on what kind of voting Homer is engaging in right now.
Chloe Thurston: Andrew
Andrew Neville: It's in a way it's sort of shows that like he's sort of thinking about the future past and future at the same time we did it wrong.
Andrew Neville: He has an idea of what the past was. And he's like, how did these people done in the past but like it is retrospective voting, but it's like with an incorrect perspective.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, that's right. There's a little bit of retrospective voting in there.
Chloe Thurston: And also a little bit of
Chloe Thurston: Sort of Voter Information and limitations, which I think is actually a pretty good example of. So I'm going to show one more just because of time, not for me to show the entire clip. Again, it's not too long since Ronald Reagan. Here we go. And they're in the polling place and make a decision.
I think when you make that decision, it might be, well, if you would ask yourself.
Are you better off.
than you were four years ago.
Is it easier for you to go and buy things in the stores and it was four years ago.
Is there more or less unemployment in the country than there was four years ago.
Is America as respected throughout the world because it was. Do you feel that our security.
Is a safe that we're a strong as we were four years ago. And if you answer all those questions. Yes. Why then, I think your choice is very obvious to you vote for
If you don't agree.
If you don't think that this course that we've been on for the last four years, is what you would like to see us fall over the next four
Chloe Thurston: Then I could suggest another choice that you hear okay what's Reagan getting at here.
Chloe Thurston: Well,
Lilah Weisman: I definitely think this is a retrospective voting example. He's basically asking you to judge his performance or not just his performance, but the performance of
Lilah Weisman: The entire government well over the time that he's been in office and basically saying, if you're satisfied vote incumbent if not vote. Another way.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, that's great. That's the
Lilah Weisman: Perfect encapsulation of what's
Chloe Thurston: Going on. Yeah, and I think this is like such a wonderful example of retrospective voting and sort of you know someone who is encouraging people
Chloe Thurston: To do that, right, because you know i think that at this point. Reagan, despite confident that
Chloe Thurston: You know, most voters are going to ask that. And you know that that's going to help him right that that that that sort of retrospective voting will help him and his party. So I'm gonna see if we have enough time to do this one. This one's a little bit longer. I might um
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, we'll have time to do it. We do, yes. How has the national debt personally affected each of your lives. And if it hasn't. How can you answer trying to cure for the economic problems of the common people. If you have no experience and what's ailing them.
Well, I think the national debt affects everybody
Obviously it has a lot to do with interest rates, it has. She's saying you personal basis. How has it affected you
has it affected you personally. Well, I'm sure it has. I love my grandchildren. I want to think that
I want to thank think that they're going to be able to afford an education. I think that that's an important part of being a parent I if the question if you're maybe I won't get it wrong. Are you suggesting that if somebody has means that the national debt doesn't affect them.
I'm not sure I get it helped me with a question and answer. I've had friends that have been laid off and jobs. I know people who cannot afford to pay the mortgage on their homes, their car payment.
I have personal problems with national debt, but how has it affected you and if you have no experience in it. How can you help us if you don't know what we're feeling she means more the recession.
The economic problems today the country faces, rather than they are you how to be in the White House for a day and hear what I hear and see what I see and read the mail I read and touch the people that I touch from time to time I was in the Lomax am a church.
To black church just outside of Washington, DC, and I read in the in the bulletin.
About teenage pregnancies about the difficulty that families are having to medians make ends meet. I talked to parents. I mean, you got to care.
everybody cares if people aren't doing well. But I don't think it. I don't think it's fair to say you haven't had cancer. Therefore, you don't know what it's like
I don't think it's fair to say, you know, whatever it is, if you haven't been hit by personally but everybody's affected by the debt.
Because of the tremendous interest. It goes into paying on that debt. Everything's more expensive. Everything comes out of your pocket in my pocket. So it's, it's that. But I think in terms of the recession.
Course you feel it when you're president of the United States. And that's why I'm trying to do something about it by stimulating the export vesting more better education system. I can clarify. Nobody else affected you again.
You know, people who lost their homes.
Well, I've been governor of a small state for 12 years I'll tell you how it's affected me every year.
Congress and the President signed laws makes it make us do more things. It gives us less money to do it when I see people in my state middle class people their taxes have gone up in Washington and their services have gone down while the wealthy have gotten tax cuts.
Chloe Thurston: I have seen what's happened in this last four years, when in my state when people lose their jobs, there's a good chance I'll know about their names when a factory closes. I know the people who ran it
Chloe Thurston: When the businesses go bankrupt. I know them. And I've been out here for 13 months meeting and meetings just like this ever since October.
Chloe Thurston: With people like you all over America people that have lost their jobs lost their livelihood lost their health insurance. What I want you to understand is the national debt is not the only cause of it.
Chloe Thurston: It is because America has not invested in its people, it is because we have not grown is because we've had 12 years of trickle down economics.
Chloe Thurston: We've gone from first to 12th in the world and wages, we've had for years where we produce no private sector jobs. Most people are working harder for less money than they were making 10 years ago.
Chloe Thurston: It is because we are in the grip of a failed economic theory and this decision you're about to make better be about what kind of economic theory, you want
Chloe Thurston: Not just people saying, I want to go fix it. But what are we going to do. I think we have to do is invest in American jobs American education control American healthcare costs and bring the American people together again. Okay, so, um, briefly time but
Chloe Thurston: All the different things that stuck out in that exchange. You know what different aspects of of this voting decisions are are exemplified here, Hank, you want to say something.
Hank Yang: Oh yeah, I think that the question that was posed.
Hank Yang: Was like, how
Hank Yang: You sort of relate to like the working class like the common people, but then both like of the candidates for
Hank Yang: I guess the wealthy class. And so they might not have been able to relate as well, and therefore wouldn't be able to help. And I think, then the very beginning bush like butchered bed a lot and he
Hank Yang: didn't really seem like he was able to really connect with the people that were like potentially
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, lead
Do you want to add to that.
Lee Ajisafe: Yeah, I definitely agree that it was personal characteristics about and even though I guess it was sort of frame in either perspective. Like, how will you help us or retrospective.
Lee Ajisafe: And how have you don't even ask sense though. It's definitely personal characteristics couched in a different kind of way.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah. And so here's another question. Why do you think, and I think the personal characteristics really come out.
Chloe Thurston: Clinton is being very strategic and sort of you know saying why he's able to feel her pain that's his line on the election that you're I feel your pain.
Chloe Thurston: He's very strategic in that. And why do you think that's the case. What is he trying to do or what sort of advantages. Does that give him that that bush might not have
Chloe Thurston: Sam.
Sam Keimweiss (he him his): Okay, can connect to the voter on a personal level. Then, as we're talking about them. The voters likely to respond thinking maybe he'll act in their interests, because
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, exactly. And so
Chloe Thurston: That's great. And so he doesn't have the
Chloe Thurston: He's not getting company. He doesn't have a record to run on or, you know, the same ability to tap into a retrospective voting among the entire electorate.
Chloe Thurston: As Bush has. And so what he can do, though, is try to maybe drop his own personal background or sort of draw from his experience as governor of a state. And so he's trying to sort of take that retro you know like
Chloe Thurston: Not everyone in the country is from Arkansas, but maybe he can still sort of reflect on this time there and use that to try to generate some sympathy for his candidates it
Chloe Thurston: So thanks everyone. And we're going to keep going. Just because I have four minutes and now have to, oh no, that's not
Chloe Thurston: Okay, I'm sure that works. Okay. So, um, what, one quick caveat I want to make about retrospective voting.
Chloe Thurston: That I think is really interesting is, again, because partisanship is so strong, it's hard to really say that people can objectively, you know, identify like retrospectively vote.
Chloe Thurston: It's still going to be shaped by their partisanship. And so here's a question where people were just asked whether or not Trump sort of
Chloe Thurston: fulfilled his campaign promises and you would think that this might be something and they're on the left hand side. That would be somewhat objective. And yet, as you can see here
Chloe Thurston: There's a huge difference between LinkedIn voters and Trump voters in 2016 in terms of whether they believe that those promises were fulfilled. Now, so, you know, there's a question about whether one can vote retrospectively when
Chloe Thurston: When sort of the partisan lenses is so strong as well. Let's go to one final sort of set of questions. I'm sorry that I'm going to have to go through this quickly.
Chloe Thurston: But it's actually a pretty fast answer. And that's the question of whether campaigns matter anyways. So, you know, I already mentioned, sort of, that people
Chloe Thurston: And how people think about voting and how they decide, you know who to vote for, what shapes or votes, but I haven't really mentioned campaigns that much, aside from maybe the strategy that some of these different
Chloe Thurston: Candidates are using when they're talking to people in debates and etc. Um, and so you can see here, you know,
Chloe Thurston: There's a lot of coverage about how campaigns might matter or not matter when brock obama won in 2008
Chloe Thurston: The media like widely praised his campaign strategy for the win. Similarly, you know when when Trump came from behind suddenly became a sign of like what turned out to be a brilliant campaign.
Chloe Thurston: We're seeing this now to. It's a little bit early to to speak, but you know HERE, YOU KNOW, THIS IS FROM POLITICO from time Trump's instinct to attack helped win him the White House. Now, it might be at his undoing.
Chloe Thurston: HERE'S THIS IS FROM POLITICO the unspectacular excellence of Joe Biden slow and steady campaign. So maybe this maybe this phrases important questions where the word was Obama's victory in trouble, trouble just campaign activities was Trump's
Chloe Thurston: Is the, sort of, you know, these you know this coverage about sort of bad campaigns versus good campaigns. Is it really the campaign. Are there other things that are
Chloe Thurston: factoring into the likely outcome. Well, I'm like I said, and you know, are there sort of events that are game changers to whether within a campaign or sort of outside of the campaign.
Chloe Thurston: One thing that this shows is, you know, despite all the different issues that have been called Game Changers in the last year.
Chloe Thurston: For sort of the ranking of the candidates are sort of, you know, the relative position and hasn't changed all that much.
Chloe Thurston: And in general, political scientists, you know, think that the influence of campaigns is actually pretty limited.
Chloe Thurston: So part of this is again because voters choices of who to vote for dependent on fundamentals on their launch getting multiple identities and larger political events and larger trends that are outside of the control of campaigns.
Chloe Thurston: Another thing is that there aren't very many undecided voters by election time. So again, it's hard to say that campaigns are necessarily persuading them.
Chloe Thurston: And then finally, is the issue of incumbency advantage. And this is is more to do sort of more relevant for Congress and the Senate for reelection rates are just very high
Chloe Thurston: But the strength of incumbency advantage also sort of means that campaigns themselves are probably not as important as we might think. So the bottom line is that
Chloe Thurston: You know, no amount of clever campaign advertising is likely to dislodge apart voters party ad. It might not convince them to vote for the other candidate.
Chloe Thurston: Campaigns more often reinforced party loyalties rather than encouraged affections and when campaigns to have an effect it's generally small, however small effects might matter a lot.
Chloe Thurston: And so, you know, while we don't think that campaigns are necessarily responsible for large swings and elections.
Chloe Thurston: That doesn't mean that campaigns don't matter at all when there are lots of undecideds then campaigns can matter, especially in primaries when there are very close elections campaigns might matter.
Chloe Thurston: So campaigns might not matter. You know, right now for the relative gap between the two candidates for looking at the presidential election, but they might matter at the state level.
Chloe Thurston: That still determines these margins. When candidates have large resource imbalances financial resources news coverage and advertising. You think campaigns might also matter. So I'm going to stop right there.
Chloe Thurston: What we'll do is we're not going to have class next week. Just write your papers.
Chloe Thurston: The papers are up right now. So your assignments are there. I gave you an extra day that way. So it's due on Friday, instead of Thursday. That way, if you want to go to office hours, you can do that.
Chloe Thurston: And I'll have office hours instead of class next week and
Chloe Thurston: What we'll do is we'll talk about it. And actually, I think it will be better. Hopefully we'll know who the President is going to be, by the time you need again and we can talk about what a mandate is whether mandates exist or not just one thing in the chat box. Okay, um,
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, um,
Chloe Thurston: Oh, oops. No. Okay. I made a huge mistake there. Sorry. The deadline for the paper. Sorry. It's not the 13th. It's the eighth I I'll fix that.
Chloe Thurston: So the it's instead of being do on next Thursday. It's do next Friday. I'll fix that right away. Thank you for mentioning that although fix that right now. But thanks everyone. And we'll talk about mandates in that week or in a week and a half and enjoy your weekend.
Vanessa Kjeldsen: Thank you. You just said the eighth. Do you mean the six for Friday. Thank you.
Chloe Thurston: Yeah, I don't have a calendar in front of
Me.
Chloe Thurston: So I changed it. I like I said, I added a date so that people other last paper, I realized that no one could actually go to my office hours or their to his office hours. So now everyone has an expert days. So that should be easier to do.
Chloe Thurston: We
Chloe Thurston: Pointing out that I messed up the dates.
Vanessa Kjeldsen: Okay.
Elisabeth Betts: Bye. Thank you.
Thanks.
Anna Lansford: Thank you.